docs: add operator documentation (#3406)
inspektor-gadget/inspektor-gadget: docs/spec/operators/index.mdx

---
title: 'Operators'
sidebar_position: 0
description: Documentation for Operators
---

import DocCardList from '@theme/DocCardList';

Operators are the cornerstone of the Inspetkor Gadget architecture. They are
modular components implementing the same interfaces
([1](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/inspektor-gadget/inspektor-gadget@v0.31.0/pkg/operators#DataOperator),
[2](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/inspektor-gadget/inspektor-gadget@v0.31.0/pkg/operators#ImageOperator)).
They are responsible for specific tasks, such as loading eBPF programs,
enriching events, sorting output, etc. All operators can generate, drop or
manipulate data and few of them handle the
[layers](../../oci.md#image-layers-and-media-types) of gadget OCI image.

Operators are arranged in a pipeline according to their priority:

> ![Opeators Pipeline](./operators-pipeline.svg)

Author: > The localmanager and kubemanager operators should be after the oci (ebpf, wasm, btf) operators, together with the filter, sorter, etc. Why did you put them at the beginning of the pipeline?

Too fast copy and paste from a previous image created by @flyth. 

> BTW, (not related with this PR), I just realized the filter should have higher priority so that we avoid enriching (localmanager/kubemanger, formatter, uidgidresolver, etc.) events that will be discarded by the filter operator.

What about if we want to filter by enriched data?

Thanks for the priority data. I added it to each operator, perhaps we can put a document with your comment too.

> ![Opeators Pipeline](./operators-pipeline.svg)

Reviewer: > What about if we want to filter by enriched data?
>
Good point. That's why we put it there hahaha.

> Thanks for the priority data. I added it to each operator, perhaps we can put a document with your comment too.
>
Yep. A central point where to see all prios in orde would be very useful. Maybe somehow auto-generated and verified in the CI?

> ![Opeators Pipeline](./operators-pipeline.svg)

Reviewer: Now that I think better. Maybe we should start using always mermaid graph as they can be easily updated by anyone. WDYT?

> ![Opeators Pipeline](./operators-pipeline.svg)

Reviewer 2: ```mermaid
block-beta
  columns 8
  block:group1:2
    columns 3
    space oci space ebpf wasm btfgen
    style oci fill:#ffffff00,stroke:#ffffff00
  end
  block:group2:2
    columns 1
    kubemanager localmanager
  end
  filter
  sorter
  ...
  block:group3:2
    columns 1
    otelmetrics["otel metrics"]
    cli
  end

```

> ![Opeators Pipeline](./operators-pipeline.svg)

Reviewer 2: ```mermaid
flowchart LR
    oci-->manager
    manager-->filter
    filter-->sorter
    sorter-->dotdotdot["..."]
    dotdotdot-->output
    subgraph oci
        ebpf
        wasm
        btfgen
    end
    subgraph manager[" "]
        direction TB
        kubemanager~~~localmanager
    end
    subgraph output[" "]
        otelmetrics["otel metrics"]~~~cli
    end
```

> ![Opeators Pipeline](./operators-pipeline.svg)

Reviewer 2: With mermaid, we can make boxes clickable to the right section in the documentation.

> ![Opeators Pipeline](./operators-pipeline.svg)

Author: I took the version without the clickable box. I wanted them to point to the operator documentation but I wasn't able.

> ![Opeators Pipeline](./operators-pipeline.svg)

Reviewer 2: @mauriciovasquezbernal I think you mistakenly merged the version with the links.

> ![Opeators Pipeline](./operators-pipeline.svg)

Author: ops, opened #3437

explicitly disable an operator. Also, all operators are currently built-in, [we
plan](https://github.com/inspektor-gadget/inspektor-gadget/issues/2497) to
support third-party operators in the future.

## Parameters

Operators expose parameters to control them. There are two kinds of parameters:

### Global

These parameters have a global scope and can only be set on the server part when
[deploying](../../reference/architecture.md#on-kubernetes) Inspektor Gadget in Kubernetes,
running it as a [daemon](../../reference/architecture.md#ig-as-daemon) or running it
[locally](../../reference/architecture.md#locally). It means, these paremeters aren't
available to users running gadgetctl or kubectl-gadget. They are intended to
control sensitive things like security configuration that can only be set by the
system administrator.

### Instance

These parameters can be set each time a gadget is run and only have impact on
the gadget being run.

Parameters are passed as flags when [running](../../reference/run.mdx) a gadget using the CLI
tools. When using the [APIs](../../apis), it's required to use the full
qualified name.

> <DocCardList />

Reviewer: Should we put a tittle between the `Instance` section and the list of operators. It looks strange (like there were part of the instance section):

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/780e8dd5-5f95-43c5-bd5c-5d250564136c)

---
title: 'Operators'
sidebar_position: 0
description: Documentation for Operators
---

import DocCardList from '@theme/DocCardList';

> Operators are the cornerstone of the Inspetkor Gadget architecture. They are

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Operators are the cornerstones of the Inspektor Gadget architecture. They are
```

modular components implementing the same interfaces
([1](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/inspektor-gadget/inspektor-gadget@v0.31.0/pkg/operators#DataOperator),
[2](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/inspektor-gadget/inspektor-gadget@v0.31.0/pkg/operators#ImageOperator)).
They are responsible for specific tasks, such as loading eBPF programs,
enriching events, sorting output, etc. All operators can generate, drop or
manipulate data and few of them handle the
[layers](../../oci.md#image-layers-and-media-types) of gadget OCI image.

Operators are arranged in a pipeline according to their priority:

![Operators Pipeline](./operators-pipeline.svg)

Operators are enabled automatically based on the gadget that's being run,

> according to the layers present on the OCI image, to the types used by the eBPF

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
according to the layers present on the OCI image, by the types used by the eBPF
```

programs, etc. It's currently [not
possible](https://github.com/inspektor-gadget/inspektor-gadget/issues/1992) to
explicitly disable an operator. Also, all operators are currently built-in, [we

> plan](https://github.com/inspektor-gadget/inspektor-gadget/issues/2497) to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
however plan](https://github.com/inspektor-gadget/inspektor-gadget/issues/2497) to
```

support third-party operators in the future.

## Parameters

Operators expose parameters to control them. There are two kinds of parameters:

### Global

These parameters have a global scope and can only be set on the server part when
[deploying](../../reference/architecture.md#on-kubernetes) Inspektor Gadget in Kubernetes,
running it as a [daemon](../../reference/architecture.md#ig-as-daemon) or running it
[locally](../../reference/architecture.md#locally). It means, these paremeters aren't
available to users running gadgetctl or kubectl-gadget. They are intended to
control sensitive things like security configuration that can only be set by the
system administrator.

### Instance

These parameters can be set each time a gadget is run and only have impact on
the gadget being run.

> Parameters are passed as flags when [running](../../reference/run.mdx) a gadget using the CLI
> tools. When using the [APIs](../../apis), it's required to use the full

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Parameters are passed as flags when [running](../../reference/run.mdx) a gadget using the clients (kubectl-gadget / gadgetctl). When using the [APIs](../../apis), it's required to use the full
```

Author: I added the list of different tools as suggested. I don't think clients is totally right as it also applies to `ig`.

---
title: 'Operators'
sidebar_position: 0
description: Documentation for Operators
---

import DocCardList from '@theme/DocCardList';

Operators are the cornerstones of the Inspektor Gadget architecture. They are
modular components implementing the same interfaces
([1](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/inspektor-gadget/inspektor-gadget@v0.31.0/pkg/operators#DataOperator),

> [2](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/inspektor-gadget/inspektor-gadget@v0.31.0/pkg/operators#ImageOperator)).

Reviewer: @mauriciovasquezbernal why to point to a specific version and not to point to the latest:

https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/inspektor-gadget/inspektor-gadget/pkg/operators#DataOperator
https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/inspektor-gadget/inspektor-gadget/pkg/operators#ImageOperator

?

Author: I didn't find a way to point to latest, but you're right, latest it better.

Reviewer: https://github.com/inspektor-gadget/inspektor-gadget/pull/3440
